JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
We will be doing something very
rapidly having
to do with the security of our
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Blocked by the
courts, President
Trump considers next steps for
his controversial
immigration policy.
Then: taking on U.S.-Asian
relations.
The president welcomes Japan's
prime minister
to the White House, while
dodging a potential
rift with China.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
take on the
week's news.
Plus: From his beginnings in
Motown, to receiving
the prestigious Gershwin Award,
hit-maker
Smokey Robinson sits down with
Jeffrey Brown
to talk about a lifetime of
music.
SMOKEY ROBINSON, Musician: We
were not just
some artists who recorded for
the same label.
We were actually friends.
We were like brothers and
sisters.
We hung out.
We have what we call the Motown
family, and
we have always had that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
now says that
he may sign, in his words, a
brand-new order
on immigration as early as
Monday or Tuesday.
But he also says he still
figures to win the
court battle over his initial
attempt to bar
travelers from seven mostly
Muslim nations.
The federal court of appeals in
the Ninth
Circuit upheld a freeze on that
ban in a Thursday
ruling.
John Yang reports that all of
this unfolded
as the prime minister of Japan
visited the
White House.
JOHN YANG: President Trump made
clear today
he's ready for the court fight
about his immigration
order to be over, but he's not
waiting for
the final ruling.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
It shouldn't have taken this
much time, because
safety is a primary reason.
One of the reasons I'm standing
here today
is the security of our country.
So we will be doing something
very rapidly,
having to do with additional
security for
our country.
You will be seeing that some
time next week.
In addition, we will continue to
go through
the court process, and
ultimately I have no
doubt that we will win that
particular case.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump gave no
details of just
what that additional security
will be, but
said the dangers are clear,
though he wouldn't
give specifics about them
either.
DONALD TRUMP: While I have been
president,
which is just for a very short
period of time,
I have learned tremendous things
that you
could only learn, frankly, if
you were in
a certain position, namely
president.
And there are tremendous threats
to our country.
We will not allow that to
happen, I can tell
you that right now.
We will not allow that to
happen.
JOHN YANG: This morning, the
president took
to Twitter to call the appeals
court decision
not to reinstate his travel ban
disgraceful.
Three judges, two of them
nominated by Democrats,
one by a Republican, upheld a
restraining
order put in place by a federal
judge in Seattle
one week ago today.
The appeals court said the
government didn't
provide adequate due process to
affected travelers,
and provided no evidence that
anyone from
the seven countries in the order
has been
responsible for U.S. terror
attacks.
The judges also concluded the
administration
is unlikely to prevail in a
trial on the merits
of the case.
Within minutes of the decision,
the president
told reporters it was political
and tweeted,
"See you in court."
Washington state's attorney
general, who filed
the suit, said, bring it on.
BOB FERGUSON, Washington State
Attorney General:
We have seen the president in
court twice.
And we're two for two.
That's number one.
And, in my view, the future of
the Constitution
is at stake.
JOHN YANG: Senate Minority
Leader Chuck Schumer
tweeted that the president
should see the
writing on the wall and abandon
the order.
Hillary Clinton tweeted simply
"3-0," a reference
to the unanimous decision.
Iraqi Prime Minister Haider
al-Abadi said
he asked Mr. Trump in a phone
call to lift
the travel ban for Iraqis.
Some have worked as translators
for the U.S.
military and their lives might
be in danger
if they stay in Iraq.
For now, with the ban on hold,
refugees and
others from all of the seven
affected nations
are free to enter the United
States.
And in addition to the appeals
court ruling,
the administration faces dozens
of other legal
challenges from around the
country.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang at the
White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Late today, there
was word
that the Trump administration
may be leaning
against appealing the
restraining order to
the U.S. Supreme Court.
But the White House chief of
staff said that
it may still be possible.
In the day's other news: Ohio
Governor John
Kasich delayed eight executions
in the face
of a court fight over the
state's lethal injection
process.
A federal judge found that
process unconstitutional,
but the state is appealing.
The governor's decision pushes
back the executions
to May, or later.
From Syria's President Bashar
al-Assad, an
apparent gesture to President
Trump.
He has told Yahoo News the U.S.
is welcome
to send troops to Syria to
battle those that
he called terrorists.
But he also said in the
interview that his
permission is contingent on
Washington respecting
his government's sovereignty.
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, President of
Syria: If you
want to start genuinely as the
United States,
to do so, it must be through the
Syrian government.
We are here, we are the Syrians,
we own this
country as Syrians, nobody else.
Nobody would understand it like
us.
So you cannot defeat the
terrorism without
cooperation with the people and
the government
of any country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Assad said he
shares the priority
that President Trump places on
fighting terrorism,
but he rejected the idea of
establishing safe
zones for refugees inside Syria.
In Australia, temperatures
soared to 117 degrees
in and around Sydney today, as
an extreme
heat wave grips the country.
Major industrial energy users
shut down in
order to help prevent blackouts.
Beaches were packed with people
looking for
relief, while zoo animals cooled
off with
a hose-down and frozen treats.
Forecasters expect Saturday
could be the hottest
February day ever recorded in
Australia.
Back in this country, Education
Secretary
Betsy DeVos faced protesters in
her first
visit to a public school since a
bruising
confirmation fight.
Several dozen people tried to
block her from
entering a school in Washington.
She said later that she respects
peaceful
protest, but -- quote -- "will
not be deterred"
from doing her job.
DeVos has drawn fire for her
support of alternatives
to public schools.
Wall Street finished this Friday
on a high
note.
Mining and energy stocks led the
way, as prices
for oil and copper jumped.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained nearly
97 points to close at 20269.
The Nasdaq rose almost 19, and
the S&P 500
added eight.
For the week, all three indexes
gained about
1 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
President
Trump shifts his approach to
China; new revelations
in National Security Adviser
Michael Flynn's
relationship with Russia;
changes the newly
confirmed health secretary could
make immediately;
and much more.
confirmed health secretary could
make immediately;
and much more.
As we mentioned earlier, the
prime minister
of Japan was at the White House
today, the
beginning of several days of
talks with the
president.
The visit comes amid growing
concerns in Asia
over trade, over North Korea's
missile and
nuclear programs, and over China
flexing its
military muscle.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
The bond between our two nations
and the friendship
between our two peoples runs
very, very deep.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The two leaders
presented a
united front, despite
differences that have
emerged in the early days of the
Trump presidency.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe had
pushed hard
for the 12-nation Trans-Pacific
Partnership,
but President Trump has
officially abandoned
it.
DONALD TRUMP: On the economy, we
will seek
a trading relationship that is
free, fair,
and reciprocal, benefiting both
of our countries.
SHINZO ABE, Japanese Prime
Minister (through
translator): I am quite
optimistic that good
results will be seen from the
dialogue.
Now the free and fair common set
of rules
will be created for free trade
in the region.
That was the purpose of TPP.
That importance has not changed.
I, myself, believe that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Abe also talked
up Japanese
industry's contributions to the
U.S. economy,
after Mr. Trump blasted Toyota
last month
for planning a new plant in
Mexico.
Defense is another potential
flash point.
During the campaign, candidate
Trump suggested
Japan and South Korea could pay
more for their
own defense, up to and including
nuclear weapons.
DONALD TRUMP: North Korea has
nukes.
Japan has a problem with that.
I mean, they have a big problem
with that.
Maybe they would in fact be
better off if
they defend themselves from
North Korea.
QUESTION: With nukes?
DONALD TRUMP: Including with
nukes, yes, including
with nukes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, however,
the president
appeared to step back.
DONALD TRUMP: It is important
that both Japan
and the United States continue
to invest very
heavily in the alliance to build
up our defense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some 50,000 U.S.
troops are
stationed in Japan, the largest
American outpost
in Asia.
Last week, Secretary of Defense
James Mattis
made Asia his first overseas
visit.
In Japan, he reassured Abe that
the U.S. will
maintain its presence there.
The U.S. military also serves as
the main
counterweight to China's
increasing aggressiveness
in the South China Sea.
Today, Abe said that must
continue.
SHINZO ABE (through translator):
We need to
maintain the freedom of
navigation and rule
of law.
Such international order there
must be maintained.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hours earlier,
President Trump
spoke by phone for the first
time with China's
President Xi Jinping.
During the call, Trump retreated
from earlier
talk of disregarding the one
China policy,
which officially treats Taiwan
as part of
China.
DONALD TRUMP: It was a very,
very warm conversation.
I think we are on the process of
getting along
very well, and I think that will
also be very
much of a benefit to Japan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Abe didn't
comment on the Trump-Xi
phone call.
Later, the leaders flew to the
president's
Mar-a-Lago club in Florida,
where they will
spend the weekend and play golf.
We take a closer look now at the
United States'
relationship with Asia under the
Trump presidency
with Evan Medeiros.
He served as senior director for
Asian affairs
on the National Security Council
staff during
the Obama administration.
He is now a managing director at
Eurasia Group.
It's a business consulting
company.
Evan Medeiros, welcome back to
the program.
EVAN MEDEIROS, Eurasia Group:
Thanks.
Great to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's start
with China.
The president telling President
Xi Jinping,
at President Xi's request, that
the U.S. does
go along now with the -- want
the continue
the one China policy.
Why is that so important to the
Chinese?
EVAN MEDEIROS: Well, it's
important because
the one China policy is at the
heart of the
U.S.-China relationship.
It's the issue that Kissinger
first negotiated
with Zhou Enlai about in the
early 1970s.
It goes to the status of Taiwan
and the U.S.
position that it acknowledges
China's view
that Taiwan is part of China.
So, it's sort of a foundational
leg of the
U.S.-China relationship.
And absent recognition of the
one China policy,
it would have been very
difficult, if not
impossible, for Xi Jinping or
any Chinese
leader to do anything else in
the U.S.-China
relationship.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much of a
concern was it
to the Chinese that President
Trump state
this, given what he had said
during the campaign,
a lot of anti-China language,
rhetoric coming
from candidate Donald Trump,
then that phone
call that he had early on after
the election
with the president of Taiwan?
How worried were -- how
concerned were the
Chinese?
EVAN MEDEIROS: Well, the Chinese
were very
concerned.
Recognizing, acknowledging the
one China policy
was essential for Xi Jinping.
It was the primary concern of
the Chinese
leadership, and they didn't want
to talk about
anything else, trade and
investment, North
Korea, the South China Sea,
until the Trump
administration reaffirmed the
one China policy.
So, in many ways, the phone call
last night
removed the source of an
immediate crisis
in the relationship.
And now they can move on to
talking about
and working on other issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And one of those
issues, of
course, is China's increasingly
aggressive
stance -- we referred to in the
report just
now -- in that region,
especially the South
China Sea.
Other countries in the region,
and Japan,
which I'm going to ask you about
in just a
moment, have been increasingly
concerned about
what they're seeing China do.
There is also concern about
whether China's
role if the North Koreans should
try to do
something else in a nuclear
direction.
So, how worried should the U.S.
and other
countries in the region be about
China?
EVAN MEDEIROS: Well, we should
be worried
because the Chinese have been
increasingly
active in the maritime area.
They have been more assertive in
the economic
area.
They have been nationalists and
mercantilists.
So, there is a variety of
Chinese behaviors
that we should be concerned
about.
And the question for the Trump
administration
is, what are the policies that
they're going
to adopt to address these
challenges?
They're not new challenges for
the United
States, but they are very
difficult to figure
out how to shape China's
behavior, because
China's a big economy, its
leverage and influence
is growing.
We need Chinese cooperation, but
that certainly
shouldn't be a barrier to
pushing them on
areas where we think they need
to change their
behavior and recognize U.S.
interests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, let's
turn to Japan.
Of course, the president met
today with the
Japanese prime minister.
They're going to be spending the
weekend at
President Trump's place in South
Florida.
How would you describe, Evan
Medeiros, the
state of U.S.-Japanese relations
right now?
EVAN MEDEIROS: Well, the state
of U.S.-Japanese
relations right now is great,
because Trump
is giving Abe a very robust, you
could say
even lavish, visit to the United
States so
early on in Trump's foreign
policy evolution.
I mean, he's essentially putting
Japan at
the center of his Asia policy
and putting
alliances at the center of his
Asia policy.
And he's doing it in such a
robust way, I
mean, not just the Oval Office
meeting, the
lunch, but this weekend in
Florida.
That's normally something that
you would do
after several years of
developing a relationship
after another leader has
demonstrated their
willingness to work with you,
bring economic
deliverables.
So, this is a big deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it also comes
after President
Trump has pulled out of the
Trans-Pacific
trade deal, the TPP.
This is something the Japanese,
that Prime
Minister Abe had put a lot of
effort into.
So, how much of a complication
is that going
to be?
EVAN MEDEIROS: It's a
complication.
I think Prime Minister Abe and
many Asian
leaders are concerned about the
withdrawal
from TPP.
They're concerned about Trump's
support for
protectionism and the impact
that might have
on a lot of export-dependent
economies.
They're worried about Trump's
broader approach
to Asia.
How engaged is he going to be in
Asia?
Is ISIS going to get the
priority?
So the engagement with Japan
early on addresses
some of those issues, but not
all of them.
And then, of course, the big
issue on the
table is whether or not Abe and
Trump are
going to agree to eventually
negotiate a bilateral
free trade agreement.
That's what Trump says is going
to replace
TPP.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is that
something the Japanese
are likely to find to their
liking?
EVAN MEDEIROS: I think it is
going to be hard.
The U.S. and Japan have tried
this in the
past, and it hasn't worked.
I think now it's too politically
sensitive
for Abe, since he just got his
legislature
to ratify TPP last fall.
It's probably too early for him
to initiate
bilateral negotiations now, but
I could see
in a year or so willing to go
down that road.
But the challenge is, is that a
series of
bilateral trade agreements
doesn't replace
the region-wide effect and the
positive strategic
effect of TPP.
It's sort of because TPP was
meant to change
the rules of the game,
potentially influence
China as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now it's not
happening.
EVAN MEDEIROS: And now it's not,
that's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Not from the U.S.
standpoint.
Well, there is so much more to
talk about,
big, big part of the world,
huge, hugely important
relationship.
Evan Medeiros, thank you very
much.
EVAN MEDEIROS: Thank you very
Great to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: new
revelations about
contacts between a top aide to
President Trump
and Russia during the transition
between administrations.
Earlier this evening, Hari
Sreenivasan recorded
this conversation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just after
Christmas, the
Obama administration levied new
sanctions
against Russia for its alleged
role in meddling
with the 2016 election.
In the days surrounding that
move, Michael
Flynn, the incoming Trump White
House's national
security adviser, spoke several
times by phone
with Russia's ambassador to the
U.S.
The Trump team claimed, after
this was first
reported in January, that Flynn
was trying
to arrange a phone call between
Mr. Trump
and Russian President Putin.
Now The Washington Post reports
there may
have been other motives for the
calls.
For more on all of this, we turn
to Greg Miller,
national security reporter at
The Post.
So, first of all, what was said
in these calls?
GREG MILLER, National Security
Correspondent,
The Washington Post: So, we know
now that
these calls covered the subject
of sanctions.
We have multiple sources telling
us that Flynn
actually conveyed a signal to
the Russian
ambassador that the sanctions
that the Obama
administration was imposing,
that the Russian
government shouldn't overreact
to them, didn't
need to worry about them, that
there would
be time soon when they would be
able to revisit
these policies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, you have
nine different
sources in your story.
How do we know this is what took
place on
those phone calls?
GREG MILLER: Well, these are
phone calls which
involved the Russian ambassador
to the United
States.
U.S. intelligence agencies
monitor a lot of
the communications of Russian
officials who
are here in Washington and in
New York.
So these are calls that were all
picked up,
collected.
There are transcripts of these
calls.
They were recorded, and there
are intelligence
reports on these calls.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But the White
House has
said repeatedly that this is not
what took
place, that sanctions were not
discussed.
The vice president even went out
on TV and
said that, per his conversations
with Mr.
Flynn, that this wasn't
discussed.
GREG MILLER: That's right.
And you had several senior White
House officials,
starting with Vice President
Pence, who went
out on a very big limb for Mike
Flynn on this,
and that limb has been cut off
now.
They insisted categorically that
the subject
of sanctions had not been raised
in these
conversations, and that's not
the case.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But let's
assume for a second
Mike Flynn doesn't know that
this phone call
is being listened to by anybody
else than
the person he's talking to.
Is there anything illegal that
he did in the
phone call itself?
GREG MILLER: Yes, possibly.
The difficulty here is that the
statute that
applies in these cases dates to
1799 and,
in over 200 years, has never
been prosecuted.
It's something that the FBI just
doesn't really
want to investigate or
prosecute.
Nevertheless, that statute
exists.
And it bans unauthorized U.S.
citizens from
negotiating with foreign
governments when
they're not in power, when
they're not yet
in a position to do so in the
United States.
And every indication to us is
that Flynn did
just that in this conversation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is that the
reason that
Vladimir Putin didn't retaliate
once those
sanctions came out?
It seemed that there was about a
24-hour gap
or so there.
GREG MILLER: Yes, I mean, that
was this huge
source of concern and surprise
and mystery.
I mean, in the history of
U.S.-Russia relationships,
there have been lots of
retaliatory measures,
diplomatic sanctions, economic
sanctions,
expulsions of spies and so
forth.
It's almost always reciprocal.
But in this case, Putin
surprised everybody
by saying, you know what, we're
not going
to do anything this time, we're
to respond, we're just going to
wait and see
how this plays out.
And that led to a lot of
suspicion in the
government.
Was there a signal sent?
That led to further
investigation and scrutiny
of these calls between Flynn and
the ambassador.
HARI SREENIVASAN: If now
Congress or anyone
decides to take actions against
Mike Flynn,
is there the possibility of a
chilling effect?
Diplomats talk to each other all
the time.
They have relationships that
span beyond administrations.
They meet each other in
different conferences
and so forth.
GREG MILLER: Absolutely.
So, that is an issue.
And that probably helps explain
why this law
has never been prosecuted.
Authorities, U.S. authorities,
do not really
want to discourage people who
are supposed
to be communicating with
officials overseas
from doing so.
However, you're not supposed to
send signals
like this that undermine the
existing government,
that are contrary to the U.S.
policy.
And in this case, it was
particularly egregious,
because this was at a moment
when the United
States was just coming to the
grips with the
fact that Russia had waged a
cyber-campaign
to upend the 2016 election and
try to help
elect Trump.
And here his top national
security adviser
is communicating with the
Russian ambassador
in that very moment in time and
apparently
sending a signal, don't worry
about this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Greg Miller of
The Washington Post, thanks so
much.
GREG MILLER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, after Hari
recorded that
conversation, President Trump
was asked about
the story while flying to
Florida.
Mr. Trump said -- quote -- "I
don't know about
it.
I haven't seen it.
What report is that?"
National Security Adviser
Michael Flynn was
among the passengers on Air
Force One.
National Security Adviser
Michael Flynn was
among the passengers on Air
Force One.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and David Brooks' take on the
week's news;
plus, Smokey Robinson reflects
on his lifelong
contribution to music.
But first: The president gets a
key member
of his Cabinet confirmed, a
right-hand man
who will take aim at the
Affordable Care Act,
and will serve as the country's
top health
official.
Lisa Desjardins has the story.
LISA DESJARDINS: He is, after
his swearing-in
today, the nation's 23rd
secretary of health
and human services.
The U.S. Senate confirmed
Georgia Congressman
Tom Price in the wee hours this
morning on
a party-line vote of 52-47.
Secretary Price is a longtime
opponent of
the Affordable Care Act.
To Democrats like Maria Cantwell
of Washington
State, that is the problem.
SEN.
MARIA CANTWELL (D), Washington:
My view is,
this vote is the first vote in
the repeal
of the Affordable Care Act.
LISA DESJARDINS: But to
Republicans like Tom
Cotton of Arkansas, that's
Price's appeal.
SEN.
TOM COTTON (R), Arkansas: You
could say his
chief qualification for the job
of replacing
Obamacare is, he had the good
sense to oppose
it in the first place.
LISA DESJARDINS: Price is also a
retired doctor,
the first physician to lead HHS
in nearly
25 years.
But in confirmation hearings, he
faced tough
questions over his relationship
with health
care companies, and his
investment in some
which were affected by his
actions in Congress.
Now Price is responsible for a
more than a
trillion-dollar health agency
budget, for
a department that oversees food
and drugs,
biomedical research, public
health threats,
and, of course, a large portion
of U.S. health
care.
That includes Medicaid, which
covers more
than 74 million people, and
Medicare, over
55 million.
His theme?
A smaller role for the federal
government.
In Congress, Price backed a
proposed cap on
Medicare spending per person.
Price also supported giving
states fixed amounts,
in block grants, to cover
low-income people
on Medicaid.
But his new boss, Donald Trump,
said on the
campaign trail he wouldn't touch
Medicare
or Medicaid.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Save Medicare, Medicaid, and
Social Security
without cuts.
Have to do it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mr. Trump has
not commented
since becoming president, but he
has stressed
an area of agreement with Price:
repeal of
the Affordable Care Act.
This was today at a joint press
conference
with Japanese Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe.
DONALD TRUMP: Obamacare, as you
know, is a
total and complete disaster.
So, we're going to end up with
tremendous
health care at a lower price,
and I think
people are going to be extremely
happy.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meantime, the
Associated
Press estimates some 12 million
Americans
have signed up for the
Affordable Care Act
for the next year, and
Republicans are feeling
the pressure from many concerned
about a replacement.
Last night at a town hall
advertised as focused
as health care, Utah Congressman
Jason Chaffetz
was bombarded by angry
constituents on a variety
of issues.
And, in Tennessee, a similar
scene for Representative
Diane Black, as health care
policy and politics
collide.
Now that Secretary Price has
been sworn in,
let's take a closer look at what
he may try
to do, more quickly, and over
the long term.
Julie Rovner covers this for
Kaiser Health
News.
She's a friend of the
"NewsHour."
And she joins me now.
Thank you, Julie.
JULIE ROVNER, Kaiser Health
News: Thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: Let's talk with
Republican
agenda item number one, the
Affordable Care
Act.
In Secretary Price, we have a
man who literally
authored a bill to repeal it.
We have both reported that
Republicans see
him as a major part of their
repeal effort.
But what can he actually do?
What is he likely to do on the
Affordable
Care Act?
JULIE ROVNER: Well, what he can
actually do
and what he will likely do are
two different
things.
What he can actually do is quite
a lot.
For as long as the Affordable
Care Act was,
there are a whole lot of places
where it says
the secretary shall or the
secretary may.
So he has a lot of power to
determine the
details around what happens to
the law.
And he can take apart a lot of
the details
that the Obama administration
added to it.
Now, what will he do?
There's an issue here with
whether or not
the Republicans want to make
sure that there
is still an individual insurance
market next
year in 2018, while they're
figuring out what
to replace it with.
Insurers need to know that
really by later
this spring.
And so some are expecting him
to, on the one
hand, try to take some things
apart, on the
other hand, try to make sure
that the insurance
industry stays in, and so to
give them some
security about what might be
coming.
LISA DESJARDINS: And as he has
to deal with
the insurance market, which is
one issue,
he has to deal with, of course,
all of us
and our health care.
And Obamacare has some
preventative services
in it.
Included in that, contraception,
screenings.
What kind of say does he have
over whether
those will continue to be
cost-free?
JULIE ROVNER: Well, he can
change that if
he wants to.
Now, some of it was done by
regulation.
And in order to change
regulations, there
is a process that even
departments have to
go through of notice and public
comment.
And it can take several, many
months sometimes.
There is also something that's a
little less
formal called guidance, and
guidance, he can
undo pretty much whenever he
wants.
So, he has the power both ways.
It's just whether some things
will be faster
or slower.
LISA DESJARDINS: On
contraception, a lot of
people paying attention to that.
That is one that could take a
few months,
but he could still do it?
Is that right?
JULIE ROVNER: Yes, well, he can
make it easier
probably for religious
organizations, employers
to opt out of providing
contraception.
That's been a huge issue.
In terms of keeping it
cost-free, that would
have to be changed through a
regulation.
That would take a little bit
longer.
LISA DESJARDINS: Another one,
Medicaid.
Republicans on the Hill, I know,
tell both
of us that that is one of the
biggest puzzles
for them.
They have to deal with how to
expand it or
not expand it, what they do.
But, Secretary Price, you report
that he can
change requirements for the poor
who receive
Medicaid?
JULIE ROVNER: That's right.
Well, he can't change the law,
but he can
change some of the regulations
that have to
do with who gets it, with who
gets much.
Of course, Congress is talking
about turning
Medicaid into a block grant,
which would limit
how much money states could get,
although
they would have much more
flexibility.
He could through his own power
give states
a lot more flexibility than they
have now,
which is what many are expecting
him to do.
So things like requiring people
on Medicaid
to meet a work requirement,
that's something
that the Obama administration
resisted, but
that new Secretary Price might
not.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's an old
debate over
welfare and work.
Republicans have long been on
one side and
Democrats on the other.
These are just -- these are
major things we
have touched on, but they just
barely describe
the reach of this agency.
Can you talk about sort of the
profound abilities
or the profound areas that now
Secretary Price
oversees?
JULIE ROVNER: People forget just
how big the
Department of Health and Human
Services is.
Its budget is more than $1
trillion a year.
It oversees not just Medicare
and Medicaid
and the Affordable Care Act, but
the Food
and Drug Administration, the
Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, the
National Institutes
of Health, the Indian Health
Service.
It touches, it's said, almost
one out of every
two Americans.
So, it is a wide, sprawling
agency.
And the secretary, as I
mentioned, has significant
power to interpret how laws are
implemented.
LISA DESJARDINS: Quickly, you
have been covering
health care for 30 years.
How pivotal, how historic could
this moment
be in terms of American health
care?
JULIE ROVNER: Well, we will see.
It's not clear, as I said,
exactly which way
the secretary is going to go.
We know that, from his
congressional career,
he's been very conservative,
would like to
remake Medicare, remake
Medicaid, repeal the
Affordable Care Act.
That's not exactly what
President Trump ran
on.
He said in his confirmation
hearings he will
do what the president wants.
We will have to see how that
goes.
LISA DESJARDINS: All right,
Julie Rovner,
chief Washington correspondent
for Kaiser
Health News, thank you so much
for joining
us.
JULIE ROVNER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
analysis of Shields
and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks, who
joins us tonight from Chicago.
And we welcome both of you.
So, before we talk about the
immigration -- the
president's immigration order,
Mark, which
the court, appeals court,
rejected the administration
argument on last night, we have
a short clip
of what President Trump has just
said a little
while ago on Air Force One as he
was flying
from Washington down to South
Florida to Mar-a-Lago.
Reporters were asking him what
he plans to
do now.
Here's that clip.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
We will win that battle.
But we also have a lot of other
options, including
just filing a brand-new order.
QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE)
DONALD TRUMP: Could very well
be.
But I like to keep you -- I
would like to
surprise you.
We need speed for reasons of
security.
So, it could very well be that
we do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mark, he
says, "I like
to surprise you."
How big a setback is this for
the president?
MARK SHIELDS: It's a significant
setback,
Judy, in large part because it
was self-inflicted.
They made mistakes, including
green card holders,
which weakened their argument
completely,
and made them vulnerable to the
court's decision.
And it reflected, more than
anything else,
a sense of chaos and a sense of
incompleteness
and a sense of lack of
thoughtfulness in the
administration on an enormously
serious issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, how do you
see it?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, first, on
that last clip
of Trump on the plane, his staff
is briefing
reporters in somewhat of a
chaotic manner
in just the last few minutes.
People are saying, oh, they are
going to just
take it to the Supreme Court,
they're going
to rewrite it.
And the two different briefings
are contradicting
each other.
And that's something The Times
reporters have
been talking and tweeting about
publicly,
which is some of the White House
staff is
in a high state of misery
because of the general
lack of -- chaos.
On the larger issue of the
travel ban, our
friend Charles Krauthammer of
The Washington
Post I think put it pretty well.
I'm not sure it's illegal, but
it's extremely
stupid.
I'm a little uncomfortable with
the idea of
judges overruling presidents on
national security
matters.
Nonetheless, so whether it's
unconstitutional
or not, I leave to others.
But it certainly has sucked the
wind out of
two or three weeks of this
administration
for no good reason.
There has never been evidence
that people
from these countries are
disproportionately
likely to commit terrorist acts.
We have sent chaos to the
airports.
We have offended the world.
We have derailed the
administration.
We have done it in such an
incompetent way,
the administration has, that
people with perfectly
legal residence have been widely
inconvenienced.
And so it's just been a screw-up
from beginning
to end, and so it's just been a
running derailment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, it's
only three
weeks in, and it's already this
way.
And David referred to the,
frankly, mixed
signals coming from the White
House today
about whether they were going to
appeal or
not and how they're going to --
what they're
going to do going forward.
But I want to ask you both about
what the
president has been saying about
the judiciary,
calling judges disgraceful, the
arguments
before the appellate court
disgraceful, saying
the country has been put at risk
by the decision.
How much should -- what should
we think about
that?
MARK SHIELDS: It's a real
surprise, Judy.
I mean, Judge Gorsuch, the
nominee for the
Supreme Court, said it was
disheartening and
discouraging to have judges
attacked for their
independence and their
integrity.
I don't know if Judge Gorsuch
was living in
a bubble in Boulder during 2016.
This is not an aberration on the
part of Donald
Trump.
He did it to Judge Curiel.
He said Judge Curiel was a total
disgrace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is the
judge...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: The federal judge
in the Trump
University charge -- case,
because his parents
had been born in Mexico and
because I'm going
to build a wall.
He manages to personalize
everything.
He brings chaos.
He will not admit that he's ever
made a mistake,
that he's ever been wrong.
That's what this whole thing is
about whether
they're going to have a new
order.
A new order, a new executive
order would be
an admission that the first
order had been
flawed, imperfect, illegal,
unconstitutional
and rejected.
So he can't have that.
So you're going to kind of do a
double -- to
me, it is reflective of this
administration.
It's three weeks in.
People in the White House work
hard, whatever
administration.
They get rewarded in psychic
income, a sense
that they are involved in
something bigger
than themselves, that it's
important.
And the people in the Trump
White House right
now are just fighting, fighting
basically
to stay above water.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there is a
sense of conflict,
David, virtually every day.
But what about -- is there a
strategy to criticizing
the judiciary, the judges, the
courts over
this?
DAVID BROOKS: No, I don't think
there is a
strategy.
There is world view.
And Donald Trump's world view is
that it's
a dangerous, miserable place,
people are out
to get him, and he needs to
strike them first.
That's been the world view from
the beginning.
And it's the world view.
To me, the big event of the week
is not one
thing.
It's the whole agglomeration of
things.
It's the rising tide of enmity
in the country,
Donald Trump attacking judges,
Donald Trump
attacking John McCain, Senator
Blumenthal,
the town halls, the riots in
Berkeley.
You have got the incivility on
the floor of
the United States Senate.
You have got just a rising tide,
every single
story.
Every time Kellyanne Conway goes
on TV, there's
another fight with whoever's
interviewing
her that particular day.
And so what you have is this
just succession
and a rising tide of conflict
and incivility
and the breakdown in the moral
norms that
usually govern how we talk to
each other.
Marco Rubio gave a pretty good
speech on the
floor of the Senate this week
sort of acknowledging
this fact.
And so it's not one thing.
It's every day.
It's the barrage of hostility
that seems to
mark our politics emanating from
the White
House, but not only in the White
House, from
his opponents as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which raises a
question, Mark,
in my mind.
Is there any historical
precedent for something
like this?
And what do the Democrats do?
Because they are getting -- a
lot of Republicans
are saying the Democrats are
holding up President
Trump's nominees for the
Cabinet.
A number of them have been
confirmed, but
a number are still waiting to be
confirmed,
that they are accusing the
Democrats of creating
a logjam.
I mean, conflict at the White
House, conflict
on the Hill, who comes out on
top of all this?
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, I mean, it's
a Cabinet
that wasn't vetted, that wasn't
prepared,
that the papers weren't prepared
for.
Democrats have to make the
fight.
If you only make fights that
you're going
to win, there would be no
women's vote in
the country, there would be no
civil rights
laws in the country.
So, they came within one vote of
denying the
confirmation to Betsy DeVos as
secretary of
education.
She was unprepared.
And so unprepared was she that
Lamar Alexander,
the chairman of the committee,
the former
president of the University of
Tennessee,
the former secretary of
education, limited
questioning of her to five
minutes, so to
deny exposure to what she didn't
know.
So, you vote -- are you going to
vote for
her, you're going to vote
against her?
Two Republicans crossed ranks,
Lisa Murkowski
and Susan Collins, to join the
Democrat.
Andrew Puzder, the secretary of
labor, a multimillionaire,
who eight weeks after he was
nominated discovers
that we, my wife and I, had for
years somebody
working on -- undocumented in
our home who
we didn't pay taxes for.
Zoe Baird, the nominee for
attorney general,
her career foundered on this.
Kimba Wood withdrew nomination
on a far less
serious charge.
And so did Linda Chavez.
Is there one standard for women
and another
for men?
Men aren't responsible, multiple
millionaire
men who deal in minimum wage
jobs, who deal
in undocumented immigrants
working for them
at reduced wages?
So, I think these are fights
worth making.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what about
that, David?
Because some people are looking
at Washington
and saying, oh, it's just more
of the same,
the wheels are not turning in
the nation's
capital.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, that's
patently true.
On the various nominees, I
generally think
the president should get his
Cabinet picks,
unless they're egregiously out
of the range,
either ethically or
intellectually out of
the range of what's acceptable.
And I have to say a lot of these
nominees
are not necessarily my cup of
tea, but I think
they're clearly within the
range.
Jeff Sessions has some
problematic spots on
his history, but he has been a
pretty normal,
respectable senator, more
conservative than
a lot of us, but a respectable
senator for
a long period of time.
So, one could -- I think the
Democrats are
right to protest, but I don't
think he's so
far out of the range of normalcy
that he shouldn't
be confirmed.
Betsy DeVos is not the most
informed person
on education policy, but I have
seen her present
a few times, and she presents as
a pretty
respectable, intelligent person
who has cared
passionately about education and
cares about
charter schools.
The teachers union may not like
her, but she's
clearly within the range of
Republican policy-makers.
As for multimillionaires, a lot
of us hope
to be a multimillionaire some
day.
Again, spotty records, but it
seems to be
not without the range.
I don't blame the Democrats for
fighting.
They have got a very energized
base.
And there is a lot to complain
about a lot
of these nominees.
But I think, if you are actually
going to
turn someone down from a
president's own Cabinet,
it better be a lot more
egregious than the
cases we have seen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that's my
question, Mark.
Where draw the line?
Where should Democrats say no?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, they have
drawn the line,
Judy.
They have confirmed -- Tillerson
is confirmed.
They backed Mattis.
They're not going to fight Ben
Carson.
I think these -- I disagree with
David.
I agree with his assumption and
his premise
that a president is entitled to
a Cabinet,
obviously, but it's not a rubber
stamp.
And I don't think anybody could
watch the
confirmation hearings of Betsy
DeVos and say
that this is somebody qualified
to be secretary
of education.
Ninety percent of children in
America go to
public schools.
She knows nothing about public
schools and
apparently cares less.
And her position on guns in
schools, got to
-- for potential grizzlies, we
should have
guns available in schools?
And Andrew Puzder, this is
somebody who basically
has just broken the law, and
he's going to
be held to no standard at all,
whereas women
nominees have been rejected in
the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think even
Republicans are
saying Puzder may have a
problem.
David, what about the point that
Mark is making?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, in some
cases, I agree.
On the Puzder point, I do agree
there has
been a double standard.
On the DeVos case, I agree that
the gun -- her
gun position is kind of weird,
kind of crazy,
but I do think she does know
about public
schools.
The reason the Betsy DeVos case
was the centerpiece
case for the Democrats wasn't
about her weakness
as a knowledgeable person on
education policy.
She does care about charter
schools, which
are public schools.
She does care about choice,
which is a perfectly
legitimate thing to care about.
It's because it's the one issue
where the
Democratic donor base was really
energized,
which was the teacher unions.
People ask, quite legitimately,
why DeVos
and why not a lot of the others?
But it's because it has to do
with the special
interest groups that run a lot
of Washington.
Would she be my first pick?
No.
Is she someone who has dedicated
her life
to education policy?
Yes, actually, she has.
I have seen her present a few
times.
I don't really know her.
But I have seen her present on
education policy,
and she's not a stupid person.
She's quite a smart person,
capable, pretty
sophisticated in subtle thought.
And so to me, that puts her in
the realm of
policy.
But we're in a climate where, as
today, she
tries to visit a school, and she
can't even
do that because protesters are
blocking that.
And that's what I mean about the
rising tide
of incivility that's sweeping
over politics.
MARK SHIELDS: That was wrong.
She should have been allowed to
go in a public
school.
It would have been a novel
experience for
her.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And this is not
about the teachers
unions alone.
That's a very convenient
punching bag, to
say that Democrats are just
jumping at strings.
Yes, the teachers unions opposed
her, and
for good reason.
They don't think that her
commitment to public
education exists.
So -- you know, but they're not
simply responding.
They have confirmed all sorts of
Republican
secretaries of education in the
past who favored
choice, including Lamar
Alexander.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, you want a
final 20
seconds here?
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: No, I'm willing to
respect Mark's
disagreement.
We're not going to be like the
rest of the
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, well,
we have a
little bit of comity in the
United States
tonight right here, right here
on the "NewsHour."
MARK SHIELDS: What is Donald
Trump going to
give President Putin for
Valentine's Day?
I'm interested.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Maybe David's got
an idea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will know by
next Friday,
because Valentine's Day is
Tuesday, in case
the two of you have forgotten.
Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thank you.
Finally tonight: Motown legend
Smokey Robinson
and the music he's made popular
for decades.
He is the focus of a special
tonight on PBS.
Jeffrey Brown sat down with him
on the eve
of getting a major honor to see
how he continues
to make what is old new again.
JEFFREY BROWN: He was a huge
hit-maker, 26
top 40 songs in the 1960s, at
one of the great
hit machines in pop music
history, Smokey
Robinson, his group, the
Miracles, Motown,
and a string of classics, like
"You Really
Got a Hold on Me."
Decades later, the 76-year-old
Robinson was
feted at a concert of his music
at Washington's
DAR Constitution Hall, as the
winner of the
Library of Congress prestigious
Gershwin Award
for lifetime contributions to
popular song.
It's been, Robinson told me, a
long and amazing
journey.
SMOKEY ROBINSON, Musician: From
the time I
was probably 6 or so, I wanted
to be a singer.
JEFFREY BROWN: From the age of
6, huh?
SMOKEY ROBINSON: Yes, I always
imagined myself.
I would stand in the mirror,
sing with the
hairbrush and all, because I
always wanted
to do that.
And I always watched all the
variety shows
that had entertainment.
So, it was always there for me.
I just didn't think it would be
possible.
I never dared to -- from where I
grew up,
I just didn't think that this
life, for me,
would be possible.
JEFFREY BROWN: At the Library of
Congress,
he toured an exhibit of Motown
memorabilia
and the place where he'd come
from, Detroit's
North End, where, quite
literally, the stars
aligned.
SMOKEY ROBINSON: Diana Ross grew
up four doors
down the street from me, Aretha
Franklin right
around the corner, you know, and
the Temptations
right across the area, I mean,
right across
the avenue, and the Four Tops.
We had Berry Gordy.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SMOKEY ROBINSON: We had a guy
who had the
dream.
JEFFREY BROWN: Gordy, still a
friend all these
years later, founded Motown,
where Robinson
served as singer and leader of
the Miracles,
songwriter and producer for
other top acts,
including the Temptations and
Marvin Gaye,
and as a record executive.
I read about how you were a
precocious songwriter,
and you brought 100 or more
songs to Berry
Gordy, and he rejected almost
all of them,
right?
SMOKEY ROBINSON: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Somehow, that
didn't discourage
you.
SMOKEY ROBINSON: No, it didn't
discourage
me whatsoever, because Jackie
Wilson was my
number one singing idol as a kid
growing up
in Detroit.
Jackie Wilson was from Detroit.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SMOKEY ROBINSON: And I had all
of his records.
And all of his songs were
written by Berry
Gordy.
And he listened to my music and
critiqued
it for me, and started to mentor
me on how
to write songs and make them
songs.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what was that
like in those
early days of Motown?
SMOKEY ROBINSON: It was highly
energetic.
It was so energetic and
competitive and loving
and wonderful at the same time.
It was all that, because we were
not just
stablemates.
We were not just some artists
who recorded
for the same label.
We were actually friends.
We were like brothers and
sisters.
We hung out.
We have what we call the Motown
family, and
we have always had that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Some songs come
quickly, Robinson
says, written at the piano in 25
minutes.
Others, like the 1979 hit
"Cruisin'" have
to simmer.
SMOKEY ROBINSON: Took five
years.
I'm not exaggerating that.
It took five years.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, if I say the
difference
between 25 minutes and five
years, I mean,
what does a song have to have,
what does a
Smokey Robinson song have to
have for you
to feel you have got it?
SMOKEY ROBINSON: It has to be a
song.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which means?
SMOKEY ROBINSON: It has to be a
song.
I mean, if I just gave you a
piece of paper
with the lyrics written down on
it, it would
mean something to you.
It would tell you a story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SMOKEY ROBINSON: Without you
hearing a melody
or music or anything like that,
it would say
something to you.
So, that's what a song is to me.
Now, you have a lot of songs
that come out,
and the beat carries them over
there, because
of the beat, and because of some
other factors
and so on and so forth.
But I want mine to be a song, if
you read
it, it's going to mean something
to you.
JEFFREY BROWN: At one point in
the late '70s,
Robinson took a break from
singing, even thinking
he might retire.
But it didn't last.
And through the years, he's
continued to record
and collaborate with a variety
of artists.
But the music business he was
such a part
of has changed dramatically.
I asked if he looked back with a
certain nostalgia.
SMOKEY ROBINSON: Yes, I look
back on it all
the time.
I looked back on it a few
minutes ago.
(LAUGHTER)
SMOKEY ROBINSON: I look back on
it because
it's a whole 'nother game now.
The music business has made a
360.
It's a whole 'nother game.
It's not nearly what it was.
And I fear for it, because, you
know, with
the advent of the computer and
online and
downloading and all these
things, they have
destroyed -- that stuff has
destroyed the
record business, not the music
business, but
the record business.
The music business is well, and
it's alive
and thriving.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the
songwriting business,
I guess, still...
SMOKEY ROBINSON: The songwriting
business
is alive and thriving, man.
You have got some wonderful
young kids out
there writing some great songs.
So, it's alive and thriving.
Now, I hope something happens to
turn it back
around to the point whereas it's
-- you're
earning a living from writing
your songs,
from your work, you know,
because it's not
like that anymore.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you just told
me that you're
going from here.
You're going back out on the
road to perform
tomorrow night.
You're still doing this.
And people want to hear those
classic songs,
right?
Does it ever get old for you?
SMOKEY ROBINSON: I still perform
because it's
a necessity for my innards.
You know what I mean?
And those songs, some of those
songs, I have
sung, I don't know how many
thousands of times.
And I promise you, every single
solitary night,
they're new to me.
They are brand-new to me that
night.
And it kills me to see people
think that,
you know, show business is sex,
drugs and
rock and roll.
And I have what you call a meet
and greet.
I do it before the show.
But when I was doing it after
the show especially,
there would be people who would
come back
and said, OK, Smoke, where's the
party?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SMOKEY ROBINSON: I just had the
party, man.
I just had the party for
two-and-a-half-hours
or however long.
I was partying.
I said, now my party is, I'm
going back to
my hotel room, and watch me some
TV until
I fall asleep, because I just
had the party.
And it is every single solitary
night.
JEFFREY BROWN: And for the happy
crowd at
the Gershwin Award concert,
Smokey Robinson
performed several of his
greatest hits.
From Washington, D.C., I'm
Jeffrey Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Great music.
And "Smokey Robinson: The
Library of Congress
Gershwin Prize for Popular
Song," it airs
tonight on most PBS stations.
And on the "NewsHour" online
right now: a
look at a different major music
event this
weekend: the Grammy awards.
Each year, the awards ceremony
remembers legendary
musicians who have died.
How do they pick which artists
to honor?
We take a closer look.
Plus: One way of measuring
advances in artificial
intelligence is through games,
like when a
computer beat a world champion
at chess.
You can read a short history.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight on
"Washington Week:
A reporters roundtable examines
critical tests
President Trump is facing over
immigration
policy and White House
personnel.
On "PBS NewsHour" Saturday: the
battle between
states to lure companies and
create jobs.
Here's a preview.
NARRATOR: In a June 2015 e-mail
to staff,
GE CEO Jeff Immelt had
complained about Connecticut
raising its taxes five times
since 2011.
Immelt told employees, the
company had formed
an exploratory team to look into
the company's
options to relocate corporate
headquarters
to another state with a more
pro-business
environment.
Massachusetts offered GE $145
million in incentives
to move.
GOV.
CHARLIE BAKER (R),
Massachusetts: We're in
a competition, and we know that,
with lots
of other folks.
I mean, we have had governors
come up to Massachusetts
to make a pitch to companies
here about why
they should be in their states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and we will see you
soon.